README.md, before:

# copyist
Mocking your SQL database in Go tests has never been easier. The copyist library
automatically records low-level SQL calls made during your tests. It then
generates recording files that can be used to play back those calls without
connecting to the real SQL database. Run your tests again. This time, they'll
run much faster, because now they do not require a database connection.

Best of all, your tests will run as if your test database was reset to a clean,
well-known state between every test case. Gone are the frustrating problems
where a test runs fine in isolation, but fails when run in concert with other
tests that modify the database. In fact, during playback you can run different
test packages in parallel, since they will not conflict with one another at the
database level.

copyist imposes no overhead on production code, and it requires almost no
changes to your application or testing code, as long as that code directly or
indirectly uses Go's `sql` package (e.g. Go ORM's and the widely used `sqlx`
package). This is because copyist runs at the driver level of Go's `sql`
package.

## What problems does copyist solve?
Imagine you have some application code that opens a connection to a Postgres
database and queries some customer data:
```go
func QueryName(db *sql.DB) string {
	rows, _ := db.Query("SELECT name FROM customers WHERE id=$1", 100)
	defer rows.Close()

	for rows.Next() {
		var name string
		rows.Scan(&name)
		return name
	}
	return ""
}
```
The customary way to test this code would be to create a test database and
populate it with test customer data. However, what if application code modifies
rows in the database, like removing customers? If the above code runs on a
modified database, it may not return the expected customer. Therefore, it's
important to reset the state of the database between test cases so that tests
behave predictably. But connecting to a database is slow. Running queries is
slow. And resetting the state of an entire database between every test is
*really* slow.

Various mocking libraries are another alternative to using a test database.
These libraries intercept calls at some layer of the application or data access
stack, and return canned responses without needing to touch the database. The
problem with many of these libraries is that they require the developer to
manually construct the canned responses, which is time-consuming and fragile
when application changes occur.

## How does copyist solve these problems?
copyist includes a Go `sql` package driver that records the low-level SQL calls
made by application and test code. When a Go test using copyist is invoked with
the "-record" command-line flag, then the copyist driver will record all SQL
calls. When the test completes, copyist will generate a custom text file that
contains the recorded SQL calls. The Go test can then be run again without the
"-record" flag. This time the copyist driver will play back the recorded calls,
without needing to access the database. The Go test is none the wiser, and runs
as if it was using the database.

## How do I use copyist?
Below is the recommended test pattern for using copyist. The example shows how
to unit test the `QueryName` function shown above. 
```go
func init() {
	copyist.Register("postgres", resetDB)
}

func TestQueryName(t *testing.T) {
	defer copyist.Open(t).Close()

	db, _ := sql.Open("copyist_postgres", "postgresql://root@localhost")
	defer db.Close()

	name := QueryName(db)
	if name != "Andy" {
		t.Error("failed test")
	}
}
```
In your `init` or `TestMain` function (or any other place that gets called
before any of the tests), call the `copyist.Register` function. This function
registers a new driver with Go's `sql` package with the name
`copyist_<driverName>`. In any tests you'd like to record, add a
`defer copyist.Open(t).Close()` statement. This statement begins a new recording
session, and then generates playback code when `Close` is called at the end of
the test.

copyist does need to know whether to run in "recording" mode or "playback" mode.
To make copyist run in "recording" mode, invoke the test with the `record` flag:
```
go test -run TestQueryName -record
``` 
This will generate a new recording file in a `testdata` subdirectory, with the
same name as the test file, but with a `.copyist` extension. For example, if the
test file is called `app_test.go`, then copyist will generate a
`testdata/app_test.copyist` file containing the recording for the
`TestQueryName` test. Now try running the test a couple more times (the first
time requires a recompile of the test, so will take longer):
```
go test -run TestQueryName
go test -run TestQueryName
go test -run TestQueryName
```
It should now run significantly faster. You can also define the COPYIST_RECORD
environment variable (to any value) to make copyist run in recording mode:
```
COPYIST_RECORD=1 go test -run TestQueryName
``` 

## How do I reset the database between tests?
The above section glossed over an important detail. When registering a driver
for use with copyist, the second argument to `Register` is a callback function:
```go
func init() {
    copyist.Register("postgres", resetDB)
}
``` 
If non-nil, this function will be called by copyist each time you call
`copyist.Open` (typically at the beginning of each test), as long as copyist is
running in "recording" mode. This reset function can do anything it likes, but
usually it will run a SQL script against the database in order to reset it to a
clean state, by dropping/creating tables, deleting data from tables, and/or
inserting "fixture" data into tables that makes testing more convenient.

## Troubleshooting
#### I'm seeing "unexpected call" panics telling me to "regenerate recording"
This just means that you need to re-run your tests with the "-record" command
line flag, in order to generate new recordings. Most likely, you changed either
your application or your test code so that they call the database differently,
using a different sequence or content of calls.

However, there are rarer cases where you've regenerated recordings, have made no
test or application changes, and yet are still seeing this error when you run
your tests in different orders. This is caused by non-determinism in either your
application or in the ORM you're using.

As an example of non-determinism, some ORMs send a setup query to the database
when the first connection is opened in order to determine the database version.
So whichever test happens to run first records an extra Query call. If you run
a different test first, you'll see the "unexpected call" error, since other
tests aren't expecting the extra call.

The solution to these problems is to eliminate the non-determinism. For example,
in the case of an ORM sending a setup query, you might initialize it from your
`TestMain` method:
```go
func TestMain(m *testing.M) {
	flag.Parse()
	copyist.Register("postgres", resetDB)
	closer := copyist.OpenNamed("test.copyist", "OpenCopyist")
	pop.Connect("copyist-test")
	closer.Close()
	os.Exit(m.Run())
}
```
This triggers the first query in TestMain, which is always run before tests.

#### The generated copyist recording files are too big
The size of the recording files is directly related to the number of accesses
your tests make to the database, as well as the amount of data that they
request. While copyist takes pains to generate efficient recording files that
eliminate as much redundancy as possible, there's only so much it can do. Try
to write tests that operate over smaller amounts of interesting data. For tests
that require large numbers of database calls, or large amounts of data, use a
different form of verification. One nice thing about copyist is that you can
pick and choose which tests will use it. The right tool for the right job, and
all that.

## Limitations
* Because of the way copyist works, it cannot be used with test and application
  code that accesses the database concurrently on multiple threads. This
  includes tests running with the "-parallel" testing flag, which enables tests
  in the same package to run in parallel. Multiple threads are problematic
  because the copyist driver code has no way to know which threads are
  associated with which tests. However, this limitation does not apply to
  running different test packages in parallel; in playback mode, this is both
  possible and highly encouraged! However, in recording mode, there may be
  problems if your tests conflict with one another at the database layer (i.e.
  by reading/modifying the same rows). The recommended pattern is to run test
  packages serially in recording mode, and then in parallel in playback mode.

* copyist currently supports only the Postgres `pq` and `pgx stdlib` drivers. If 
  you'd like to extend copyist to support other drivers, like MySql or SQLite,
  you're invited to submit a pull request.

* copyist does not implement every `sql` package driver interface and method.
  This may mean that copyist may not fully work with some drivers with more
  advanced features. Contributions in this area are welcome.

Commit message:

Add support for multiple drivers in same session (#7)
Allow connections to be made using different SQL drivers in the same copyist
session. Records generated by different drivers are stored the same way as
if there was just a single driver - in the same recording file.

The main thing preventing this from working before was that the proxyDriver
was the top-level object which stored session state. Now all session state
is broken out into a new session object which can manage multiple drivers.

Note also that this change means that Register can no longer take a resetDB
argument, since there should not be a different reset function for each
driver. A new SetSessionInit function can now be used to set the callback
function that is invoked each time a new copyist session is started.

This last change does break API backwards compatibility. But since I don't
think copyist is widely used, I'm not going to add "/v2" to the import
path, even though that's not allowed according to the SemVer spec.

README.md, after:

# copyist
Mocking your SQL database in Go tests has never been easier. The copyist library
automatically records low-level SQL calls made during your tests. It then
generates recording files that can be used to play back those calls without
connecting to the real SQL database. Run your tests again. This time, they'll
run much faster, because now they do not require a database connection.

Best of all, your tests will run as if your test database was reset to a clean,
well-known state between every test case. Gone are the frustrating problems
where a test runs fine in isolation, but fails when run in concert with other
tests that modify the database. In fact, during playback you can run different
test packages in parallel, since they will not conflict with one another at the
database level.

copyist imposes no overhead on production code, and it requires almost no
changes to your application or testing code, as long as that code directly or
indirectly uses Go's `sql` package (e.g. Go ORM's and the widely used `sqlx`
package). This is because copyist runs at the driver level of Go's `sql`
package.

## What problems does copyist solve?
Imagine you have some application code that opens a connection to a Postgres
database and queries some customer data:
```go
func QueryName(db *sql.DB) string {
	rows, _ := db.Query("SELECT name FROM customers WHERE id=$1", 100)
	defer rows.Close()

	for rows.Next() {
		var name string
		rows.Scan(&name)
		return name
	}
	return ""
}
```
The customary way to test this code would be to create a test database and
populate it with test customer data. However, what if application code modifies
rows in the database, like removing customers? If the above code runs on a
modified database, it may not return the expected customer. Therefore, it's
important to reset the state of the database between test cases so that tests
behave predictably. But connecting to a database is slow. Running queries is
slow. And resetting the state of an entire database between every test is
*really* slow.

Various mocking libraries are another alternative to using a test database.
These libraries intercept calls at some layer of the application or data access
stack, and return canned responses without needing to touch the database. The
problem with many of these libraries is that they require the developer to
manually construct the canned responses, which is time-consuming and fragile
when application changes occur.

## How does copyist solve these problems?
copyist includes a Go `sql` package driver that records the low-level SQL calls
made by application and test code. When a Go test using copyist is invoked with
the "-record" command-line flag, then the copyist driver will record all SQL
calls. When the test completes, copyist will generate a custom text file that
contains the recorded SQL calls. The Go test can then be run again without the
"-record" flag. This time the copyist driver will play back the recorded calls,
without needing to access the database. The Go test is none the wiser, and runs
as if it was using the database.

## How do I use copyist?
Below is the recommended test pattern for using copyist. The example shows how
to unit test the `QueryName` function shown above. 
```go
func init() {
	copyist.Register("postgres")
}

func TestQueryName(t *testing.T) {
	defer copyist.Open(t).Close()

	db, _ := sql.Open("copyist_postgres", "postgresql://root@localhost")
	defer db.Close()

	name := QueryName(db)
	if name != "Andy" {
		t.Error("failed test")
	}
}
```
In your `init` or `TestMain` function (or any other place that gets called
before any of the tests), call the `copyist.Register` function. This function
registers a new driver with Go's `sql` package with the name
`copyist_<driverName>`. In any tests you'd like to record, add a
`defer copyist.Open(t).Close()` statement. This statement begins a new recording
session, and then generates playback code when `Close` is called at the end of
the test.

copyist does need to know whether to run in "recording" mode or "playback" mode.
To make copyist run in "recording" mode, invoke the test with the `record` flag:
```
go test -run TestQueryName -record
``` 
This will generate a new recording file in a `testdata` subdirectory, with the
same name as the test file, but with a `.copyist` extension. For example, if the
test file is called `app_test.go`, then copyist will generate a
`testdata/app_test.copyist` file containing the recording for the
`TestQueryName` test. Now try running the test a couple more times (the first
time requires a recompile of the test, so will take longer):
```
go test -run TestQueryName
go test -run TestQueryName
go test -run TestQueryName
```
It should now run significantly faster. You can also define the COPYIST_RECORD
environment variable (to any value) to make copyist run in recording mode:
```
COPYIST_RECORD=1 go test -run TestQueryName
``` 

## How do I reset the database between tests?
You can call `SetSessionInit` to register a function that will clean your
database:
```go
func init() {
    copyist.Register("postgres")
    copyist.SetSessionInit(resetDB)
}
``` 
The resetDB function will be called by copyist each time you call `copyist.Open`
in your tests, as long as copyist is running in "recording" mode. The session
initialization function can do anything it likes, but usually it will run a SQL
script against the database in order to reset it to a clean state, by
dropping/creating tables, deleting data from tables, and/or inserting "fixture"
data into tables that makes testing more convenient.

## Troubleshooting
#### I'm seeing "unexpected call" panics telling me to "regenerate recording"
This just means that you need to re-run your tests with the "-record" command
line flag, in order to generate new recordings. Most likely, you changed either
your application or your test code so that they call the database differently,
using a different sequence or content of calls.

However, there are rarer cases where you've regenerated recordings, have made no
test or application changes, and yet are still seeing this error when you run
your tests in different orders. This is caused by non-determinism in either your
application or in the ORM you're using.

As an example of non-determinism, some ORMs send a setup query to the database
when the first connection is opened in order to determine the database version.
So whichever test happens to run first records an extra Query call. If you run
a different test first, you'll see the "unexpected call" error, since other
tests aren't expecting the extra call.

The solution to these problems is to eliminate the non-determinism. For example,
in the case of an ORM sending a setup query, you might initialize it from your
`TestMain` method:
```go
func TestMain(m *testing.M) {
	flag.Parse()
	copyist.Register("postgres")
	copyist.SetSessionInit(resetDB)
	closer := copyist.OpenNamed("test.copyist", "OpenCopyist")
	pop.Connect("copyist-test")
	closer.Close()
	os.Exit(m.Run())
}
```
This triggers the first query in TestMain, which is always run before tests.

#### The generated copyist recording files are too big
The size of the recording files is directly related to the number of accesses
your tests make to the database, as well as the amount of data that they
request. While copyist takes pains to generate efficient recording files that
eliminate as much redundancy as possible, there's only so much it can do. Try
to write tests that operate over smaller amounts of interesting data. For tests
that require large numbers of database calls, or large amounts of data, use a
different form of verification. One nice thing about copyist is that you can
pick and choose which tests will use it. The right tool for the right job, and
all that.

## Limitations
* Because of the way copyist works, it cannot be used with test and application
  code that accesses the database concurrently on multiple threads. This
  includes tests running with the "-parallel" testing flag, which enables tests
  in the same package to run in parallel. Multiple threads are problematic
  because the copyist driver code has no way to know which threads are
  associated with which tests. However, this limitation does not apply to
  running different test packages in parallel; in playback mode, this is both
  possible and highly encouraged! However, in recording mode, there may be
  problems if your tests conflict with one another at the database layer (i.e.
  by reading/modifying the same rows). The recommended pattern is to run test
  packages serially in recording mode, and then in parallel in playback mode.

* copyist currently supports only the Postgres `pq` and `pgx stdlib` drivers. If
  you'd like to extend copyist to support other drivers, like MySql or SQLite,
  you're invited to submit a pull request.

* copyist does not implement every `sql` package driver interface and method.
  This may mean that copyist may not fully work with some drivers with more
  advanced features. Contributions in this area are welcome.
